---
layout: post
title:  "Am I an entreprenur or a dreamer? Lessons learned from 10 years trying to be."
date:   2014-04-29 09:28:18
categories: entrepreneurship
---

What I've learned from 10 years of bootstraping in Norway - buckle up for a strange ride. I have collected my leassons learned in the bottom, but I think they make more sense after reading the story:

I have a product that pays for only a fraction of my bills, I have spent the last 10 years trying to make my own living. Am I an entreperneur, or will I forever try to be one? I want to share my story:

In 2003, after my BSc in computer sience at the Univercity of Oslo I enrolled to the Norwegian School of Entrepreneruship and got shipped to an internship in Shanghai. I ended up in a rather big company where noone, except a Sweede and the CEO, understood english - both to bussy to keep us bussy. It was so frustrating that I keept my eyes open for something exciting. My roomate and I ended up quiting the internship job to produce jeans at a local factory we had found. We used photoshop to produce our custom design on buttons and pocket stiches, and we stole the rest of the design of the popular sweedish jeans brand Nudie. It was a blast, and we tried to build a company around it upon our arrival to Norway but failed on a simple truth: we didn't know jack about fashion. I can only talk for my self, but this was mainly a result of the urge for creating someting, anything! At the same time another Norwegian clothing brand was having its early success, and I remember it broke my heart and passion - this was my idea god damn it. I still get emails from the factories we used, 11 years after, they want more business!

Back in Norway I enrolled in a MSc in Innovation and Entrepreneurship. After graduation I went into labor as most of my class mates, we joked about having to much education to ever start a company, knowing the risk and all. But after 1.5 years I felt an itch, it was suddon and strong. I can recall the same itch from my youth. The sleepless nights when all I can think of are new ideas and the jurn to make it on my own. I can remember drawing the logo of my own company at age 14, and as a child my father almost gave me a good old beating finding out that I charged the neighbour kids for jumping on our new trampoline. Even worse the time in Elamentary school I got my friends in line to sell the "No smoking day" material we were suppose to hand out for free. We got cought because I sold a non-smoking baloon to the lady in charge of the campaign. Im not provd of this, but we allready had bought lots of candy, and I think it gives me a clue about some of my inner workins. Anyways, I quit my job to create a company. I was fixed on my internet-idea as I had just learned about crowdsourcing (we are in 2007 now). I figured this was going to be huge and set out to create a crowdsourcing engine. A platform for other crowdsourcing entrepreneurs. I think I must have striked a good idea because I got seed funding from the norwegian govornment and got elected to stand in front of one of Norways largest private investors, I turned that down, because I didnt want to work for any body elses money. Sometimes I wonder what would have happened if had chosen to accept that offer. I spent about 6 months to land the govorment funding (about $25.000) and to plan my business. I felt comfident and very happy. Actually, I don't think I have been as happy before or after, those six months of planning and networking was a true drug for me. Then early in 2008 we all know what happend. After a fearly good paid job, my age cosidered, I had gotten my own apartment, and then the financial crisis drow the interest rates to a historical high level. I was 26, unemployed with $25.000 and a bussinessplan in my pocket - and I knew I needed that money to get someone to create my crowdsourcing platform. Oh boy was I naive about the value of the little money I had. Relucant to give in I rented out my appartment in Oslo and moved to a small wodden cabin in Lofoten, way up north in Norway. This was a crazy idea that I have never regretted. That year changed my path, for good or worse, I don't know, but it was an exciting year. Up north I hade little money and I spent what I had on onions and potatos as I paid a freelancer doing the coding on my idea. After a few months we had a product that was someting, but lacked a lot. The programmer was really good, I know that now, but I didnt then - I felt things were moving slow. Since I now had spent all my govornmental funding on him, I was stuck up north with my private savings, my half-finsihed crowdsourcing platform and my potato+onion+rabbit stue. I spent alot of time fishing and hunting and thinking what to do next.

I keept close phone contact with a fellow class mate from the master course in entrepreneurship. We discussed alot of ideas on the phone. The ideas ranged from selling watch-mobiles online (yes - they existed back then too) to bundling free GPS's in cars to earn profits on advertising. But after my failed attempt, or so I thought, on the crowdsourcing engine, we began talking about something more simple. What If we created something that everyone needed, so simple that everyone could use it? We went down that path in various directions, and ended up talking about email. Could there be anything simpler than email? At the time we had not heard of MailChimp and any other competitors that might have existed at the time. We soon learned about both MailChimp and some other intricate systems, but they were to advanced - we wanted to make something that the CEO of the local firestation could use, we wanted color codes to guide the users, pretend they are stupid as fish. And so ArcticElvis was born.

Beeing in my situation, stuck in a wodden cabing up north, with little but time, I started to code. I had no job, lived for free, and I started to code from the sun stod up in the morning, until it was gone in the ocean. Truth beeing told, thats about 0 minutes in january that far north, but I keep on anyway. 10-14 hours a day, sometimes not sleeping at all. I went the way from learning jQuery, never heard of that before, to coding rails, to making ArcticElvis - the easiest newsletter system ever. In the time of the spring 2009 I had gotten som weird habbits. I had gotten the habbit of keeping a thought for 48 hours without loosing it. Thats only possible when your are inhabitant number 22 in an off season summer travel desitation, used to be fishermanns village. I had also gotten the habbit of skipping meals, skipping brushing my teaths and was starting to live like a savvage. But I was making progress, I was coding all day, hunting rabbit and fishing, coding some more. Looking back at it now, it was a pocket of time, I hade litturaly no worriews, only dreams. I was montivated and working all spring. Then finaly summer. Light. I was becoming more skilled and we closed our first customer. They are still with us today. I packed my stuff and started to work on attracting some consultant work with my new skills. I moved in with my girlfriend who then moved from Bergen to Oslo (no point telling you she was a patient one), for the time, in Oslo, and started to live a somewhat normal life. I was lucky and got a client that paid fair wages for fair work. Balance.

After a year in Oslo my itch got back. I was suddenly a consultant, using most of my hours working for the cost of living in the capital. I was not sure what to do with ArcticElvis. He was halfbacked, not ready for shipping as it lacked a payment solution and had lots of other flaws only I knew of. Plus alot of other stuff grabs your attention back home. Friends, family, girlfriend, all important. I wanted to see what would happen if I moved to San Francisco, and without a plan other then that, me and my girlfriend moved to the city with all the startup excitement. I spent most of my time coding for my clients back in Norway, as my girl was reading for her examns, and I went on quite alot of meetups to get a feel of the startup community. I really spent all my time meeting other coders, I was a coder i my mental state now. That shift had happend silently, somewhere along my year in the cabbin up north. I learned a lot about programming, but looking back, I seemed to have forgotten about spreading the word about ArcticElvis. Cesaro wrote that a man is what he things about all day long, I guess that was why I now had became a programmer. Lock yourself up for a year alone, and you will become what you think of.

Back from San Francisco (2011) I got contacted by a relative of a friend who wanted me in on a his business idea. It was (is) a clever idea about fixing an important process in the sporting goods supplier chain. I went along, on the premisse that we would outsource the coding. I knew I could not cope with both paying my bills with consulting and create this product wihtout working my self to death, so I created the mockups and flew off to Indonesia to hire a company on the job. They worked on it for a year, under my supervision, at the same time consulting for my bills, and doing minor work on ArcticElvis on some accations when attention was required.

2012 came along and I lost my biggest consulting client and was growing tired of the hand to mouth living. The Indonesian project was not wat we had tuned our idea into in the mean time of its creation. Our vision for the product shifted as we learned more about the problems in the sporting industry. By accident a friend called out recruiting for a consulting company, and I went along with the intervju. This started a personal process where I scanned all companies in Oslo and found a little company perfect for my skillset, and applied for a job witch I got in march 2012.

The company is called Skalar, and it has been a learning bomb for me for the last two years. We have created an launched dusins of apps and web-apps for entrepreneurs and companies and I have loved working with such skilled collegues. As you know by now, Im a restless person with an itch, so into my first year I planned and executed an expedition crossing Svalbard/Spitsbergen on skies. It was 30 days on skis in minus 30 celcius, but I think that was another turningpoint for me. That was the first time I was outside of the role of the programmer for 40 days, incudling traveling and planning, since I got into coding in the wodden cabin up north back in 2008. When you walk 8-10 hours a day in winds, only distrupted by lunch, you get alot of time thinking inside your hood - and I started to dream again.

Coming back from Svalbard I went back into Skalar with motivation, but something was changed. We struck a deal were Skalar bought 20% share of ArcticElvis in return of manhours. And I took the Indonesian project into Skalar to make a fresh prototype according to our new ideas.

Now - its 2014, 7 years after ArcticElvis is born - he is a finished product. It was a very good idea 7 years ago, now it is a very crowded market. I spend alot of time thinking how we can iterate to make a good market fit with a nich. Our closest bet at the moment is divided into two directions: 1) Find a match with landing pages 2) Find a match with e-comerce. We have ongoing projects on them both.

To sum up - two weeks after I quit my second job in life - these are the lessonsed learned that I will navigate from in my new ventures and in my excisting ones.

-1) Make sure you have a unique value proposition that fits in with the DNA of your team, product and market fit.
0) Learn from polar expeditions - set a definitie goal with a limited time frame.
1) Make a prototype with little and minimum labor - talk to as many possible customers you can. Get feedback, get signatures.
2) Make a MVP (minimum viable product) and get the prospects from 1) use it. Get their feedback and learn some more.
3) Keep focus, seven years will make you miss the mark (obvious). MadMimi started at the same time and is a XXX profitable company by now.
4) Learn to delegate, you cannot build a ship alone. Team.
5) Ask for advice from people who have traveled simliar routes.
6) Don't ask for advice on your venture destination, unless you are traveling roads traveled before. Thats the nature of a venture.
7) Focus.
8) Share.
9) Don't let the internet scare you. I was for 10 years, and perhaps I will be again tomorrow. BOHO!
10) People buy what you belive.
11) Outsourcing is hard. Both language, distance and ownership can make it though.
12) learn to estimate.

I called my new company Fram Venture. Fram was the ship built by Fritjof Nansen to drift accross the north pole in 1887, when everyone thought it was land beneath the ice. The same ship took Roald Amundsen to the south pole. I called it Fram to remind myself that no can answer the question "do you think this would work?" - thats why its called venture. Its also a reminder to have a definite goal, a place in time and space that can be celebrated or failed (eighter is allright if it was definite).

Fram Venture will go on technology expeditions - littarally. You can find more about these expeditions on the front page of Fram Venture.com You can apply for the ArcticElvis expedition and the new venture expedition.

For all these 10 years I have read thousands of blogs, but never participated. So this is my HELLO WORLD/WORD, I'm officilly an participating internet citisen, like me or don't. I'm I an entrepreneur or just a dreamer? I don't know - all I know is that I still got that itch, and I guess both you and me shall find out! Thanks for reading, and call me out if there is parts of this mad long blog post you think deserve a separate post. @christianhager christian@framventure.com

Perhaps I'm up in that cabin again in a few months. lets find out ;)

{% highlight ruby %}
def print_hi(name)
  puts "Hi, #{name}"
end
print_hi('Tom')
#=> prints 'Hi, Tom' to STDOUT.
{% endhighlight %}

Check out the [Jekyll docs][jekyll] for more info on how to get the most out of Jekyll. File all bugs/feature requests at [Jekyll's GitHub repo][jekyll-gh].

[jekyll-gh]: https://github.com/mojombo/jekyll
[jekyll]:    http://jekyllrb.com
